Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today,
we're going to look at the prettiest
theorem in calculus, which is a theorem
about cubic curves or cubic polynomials.
This is one of a series of foundational
lectures in mathematics where I'm trying
to establish proper logical foundations
for the subject. In the last few videos,
we've been talking about calculus in a
very elementary setting—the setting of
polynomials. It turns out that we can do
calculus this way purely algebraically,
without any notions of limits, without any
notions of real numbers, and with complete
precision of thought. We're now going to reap
the rewards by studying this beautiful theorem.
So, cubics or cubic polynomials are something like
this: as a poly number, it's just a list of four
numbers. The four numbers are the coefficients
of the polynomial when it's written this way
in standard alpha form. So, this polynomial
is of degree three if this coefficient, d,
is not equal to zero, and we'll assume that from
now on. Then it's called a cubic polynomial. Now,
when we graph such a polynomial, in other words,
what we do is we plug in points of the form, say,
x-coordinate r and y-coordinate P(r), where P(r)
is what you get when you replace alpha here with
the number r. If you plot all those points, then
you get a curve that looks something like this,
perhaps sort of like this, or maybe going
up and down like this, or maybe like this.
So now, the study of these cubic polynomials
and their graphs—essentially, we're talking
about what are usually called functions of this
kind—is part of a larger study of cubic curves,
where we consider a more general kind
of equations involving, say, x and y,
polynomial equations where the total degree
is three. These cubic curves were studied by
Descartes, by Newton—they were of interest to
almost all classical mathematicians because
there's a lot of really interesting things that
turn out to happen for cubic curves. Today,
we're going to talk about a very special kind
of cubic curve—these cubic polynomials. So,
it's important to realize that there's
a much bigger, more general theory,
of which what I'm going to say
to you now is only a small part.
So, our strategy is to review calculus in this
elementary setting, in the context of cubic
polynomials, so you'll see exactly the steps
that we need to go through to establish the
foundations of calculus for cubic polynomials,
and then we'll be able to state and prove this
most pretty theorem. In fact, we'll be able
to do that all on one page. So, our strategy
is to first of all establish some of the basic
calculus constructions for cubic polynomials.
We're going to start with the general cubic
polynomial a + b alpha + c alpha^2 + d alpha^3,
and we're going to compute various things for it.
We're going to compute the Taylor polynomial, or
Taylor by polynomial; we're going to compute the
derivative and various higher sub-derivatives, and
then we're going to find the tangent polynomials
or tangent poly numbers for this thing.
Geometrically, that means we're going to be
studying a curve something like this. Perhaps this
is the particular polynomial 5 - 3x - 4x^2 + x^3,
and then, say, at the point r = 1, the tangent
line ends up looking something like this, and
the tangent conic is a parabola looking something
like this. So, we want to be able to compute for
every value of r what the tangent line looks like,
what the tangent conic looks like, and our theorem
is going to be something about the tangent conics.
Alright, so the first order of business is to find
the Taylor polynomial for P. That, by definition,
is just P(alpha + beta). We replace the alphas
with alpha + beta, and then we expand that using
the binomial theorem here and here, and then
we collect terms—the terms not involving beta,
the terms involving beta, the terms involving beta
squared, and the term just involving beta cubed.
So, it's just a question of expanding these
binomial things out and putting it all together.
Now, these three coefficients that are appearing
here—actually, there's four of them including that
one—these are the first sub-derivatives
of the polynomial we started with. So,
this thing here is D0 of P, this one
is D1 of P or the derivative of P,
this thing is D2 of P, and this constant D is D3
of P. D1 of P is just the same as the derivative,
so this is the derivative of that. That's
how we define what the derivative is—the
derivative is the coefficient of beta in
the Taylor polynomial. But at the same time,
we also define the second sub-derivative,
the third sub-derivative, and, in fact,
the zero sub-derivative, which of course
is just the same as the polynomial itself.
So, just for good reference, let's write
down these various sub-derivatives that we
computed. The zeroth one was the polynomial
itself; there's the first sub-derivative,
or just the derivative; there's the second
sub-derivative; and there's the third
sub-derivative. Now, for those of you who are not
used to sub-derivatives and just think in terms
of derivatives, what is the second sub-derivative
in ordinary language? It's the derivative of the
derivative divided by two. So, if you take the
ordinary derivative of this and divide by two,
you get the second sub-derivative. And what's the
third sub-derivative? It's the derivative of the
second sub-derivative divided by three. Take the
derivative of this, divide by three, and you get
the third sub-derivative. So, if you just want
to use differentiation, that's how you can go
from one to the next—that's a simplified way of
thinking about what the various derivatives are.
Alright, now let's look at the Taylor expansion
at r. Now, this is obtained by doing two things
to the previous expression. The first is
to interchange the roles of alpha and beta,
so instead of expanding in powers
of beta, we're now expanding in
powers of alpha. We started with P(alpha +
beta)—that's symmetrical in alpha and beta,
so it's completely the same if we interchange
the alphas and betas. And then the second thing
that we do is that the betas, which are
now appearing in each one of these things,
are replaced with a number r. So, we get that
expression: that's D0 of P evaluated at r,
here's D1 of P evaluated at r, here's D2 of
P evaluated at r, and D3 of P evaluated at r.
Now we make a shift or a translation in this
formula. We now replace alpha with alpha - r. So,
translate, then the left-hand side
becomes just P(alpha)—in other words,
the original polynomial—and then the alphas,
which are appearing here, here, and here,
are replaced by alpha - r—there, there, and
there. And this is called a Taylor expansion
of the polynomial P at r because it depends
on the number r that we've chosen. There's
a different such expansion for every r,
and this is a fundamental object because
it's from this that we read off the
various tangents to the polynomial.
The first, well, the zero tangent, is just the
value of the polynomial at r. If you set alpha
equal to r, then these terms all disappear, and
you're just left with that. The first tangent
is the sum of the first terms all the way up to
degree 1. The second tangent is the sum of all
the terms up to degree 2. The third tangent
is the sum of all the terms up to degree 3,
which in this case is all of it. That's
the general pattern of how we write down
the tangents to the polynomial at
r—we just take initial parts of
the Taylor expansion. In other words, we
truncate the Taylor expansion suitably.
So, let's have a look at what the tangent
line and the tangent conic simplify to
when we look at them carefully. So, here are
the first two terms in the Taylor expansion,
the degree 1 part of it. What we want to do now is
rewrite it. In other words, we want to expand it
out and separate it into the things involving
alpha and the things not involving alpha. So,
here are the things not involving alpha to begin
with, and then we're going to have to add to that
minus r times each of these. And have a look at
what happens when we take minus r times each of
these: minus r times b will exactly cancel with
this br that's already there. So, we'll have an a,
but we will have no brs left. Here, there are
cr^2, and we're going to add to that -2cr for
a total of -cr^2. Here we have dr^3, and we're
adding to that -3dr^3 for a total of -2dr^3. The
coefficient of alpha is just this, so it's just
copied unchanged. That is the tangent line to P
at r, and here's our symbol for it: it's the
first tangent, the first tangent to P at r.
Okay, now we're going to look at the second
tangent to P at r. We take the terms up to degree
2 in the Taylor expansion. So, the first two terms
here are just the ones we've already obtained,
and we've already simplified that, so why
not just take what we've already got—the
formula for the tangent line—and replace
it there? That's what this plus this is,
so we only need to add this now to it.
That's c + 3dr, and here I'm expanding
this out: alpha^2 - 2r alpha + r^2. Now, something
pleasant happens—it's a little bit surprising that
the thing becomes relatively simple; there's
a lot of cancellation going on here—there's
a little bit of magic trickling through. The
constant term is only a + dr^3; for example,
this minus cr^2 term that was there is going
to be removed when we have an r^2 times c here,
so those two combine to get rid of that one. The
minus 2dr^3 that we have there, well, that has
to be combined with 3dr^3 there for a total of
dr^3. What about the coefficient of alpha? Well,
here's how many alphas we have to start with, and
then we have to add a certain number of alphas
here. How many? Well, from here, -2cr alpha—that's
exactly canceling this one—and also -6dr^2 times
alpha—we already have 3dr^2 times alpha, so we're
going to have -3dr^2 altogether. And finally, the
coefficient of alpha^2 is the same as it is here;
we just copy this thing over. This is a polynomial
of degree 2—it's called a tangent conic to P at
r. There's a polynomial of degree 1—that's the
tangent line to P at r; this is the tangent conic
to P at r. And it's all just high school algebra.
So, I've just copied what we've already
determined here: there's the original
polynomial, there's the tangent line to it at
r, there's the tangent conic to it at r. So,
for example, if the polynomial happens to be
the one that we drew a picture of earlier,
and if we're looking at the point r = 1, then if
you take this expression here, substitute a = 5,
b = -3, and so on, and then plug in r = 1, you can
check that you get 7 - 8 alpha—that's a line. And
correspondingly, if you plug the various values
into here, you get 6 - 6 alpha - alpha^2—that's
a parabola opening downwards. And you
can check if you go back to that previous
picture that these are more or less the line
and the tangent conic that I drew earlier.
Let's make a nice little observation.
We'll observe that if we're looking at
the tangent line, its slope is just
the derivative of P evaluated at r.
That's the same thing that we found for
quadratic polynomials—that the slope of
the tangent line is the first derivative
evaluated at the point in question. We see
here that it's also true for cubics—in
fact, it's true for any polynomial.
The other observation is that the coefficient
of alpha^2 in the tangent conic—so,
the corresponding top term here—that also has
an interpretation in terms of a sub-derivative:
that's the second sub-derivative of P
evaluated at r. So, in the formulas for
the tangent line and the tangent conic,
these terms are already dictated by the
first and the second derivatives. These
three terms here are perhaps a little bit
less predictable but make the
subject sort of interesting.
So, that finishes our preliminaries having
to do with calculus. Now I just want to say
a few words about a special cubic—the simplest
cubic, P equals alpha^3. There's a graph of it;
it flattens out around zero, of course, it
increases rather dramatically as you keep going,
and it has three important properties that
it's worth pointing out. First of all,
it's an odd function, meaning that if
you evaluate it at -r, you get -P(r). So,
the value at -2, for example, which is -8, is
related to the value at 2 by being negatives—8
and -8 are negatives. That's obvious
because -r^3 is the same as -(r^3).
The second observation is that P is increasing. If
r1 is less than r2, then when you evaluate P(r1),
it's less than P(r2). That's perhaps clear if
you just look at the right-hand side first. Okay,
if you have two numbers, r1 and r2,
and r1 is less than r2, well then,
if you multiply r1 by itself three times,
you're going to get something less than if
you multiply r2 by itself three times. So, it's
increasing on this side, and then by symmetry,
or the odd property, it's also increasing on this
side—in other words, as we go right, it goes up.
And the third observation is that this
is what's called a one-to-one polynomial.
What that means is that if the polynomial
values at two points agree—in other words,
if P(r1) = P(r2)—then in fact r1 = r2, which
is to say that the function never takes on
the same value at different points. So, this
is often referred to in terms of a horizontal
line—if you have a horizontal line, then it
may or may not meet the graph as it turns out,
but if it does meet the graph, it only meets
it at one point, right? It's not the case that
there's a point there and another point there
on the graph—the polynomial is one-to-one.
Okay, so with these preliminaries, here is the
prettiest theorem in calculus as far as I'm
concerned. Let's see if you agree. So, we'll
give this theorem a name: call it the Cubic
Disjoint Tangent Conic Theorem. It's a rather
long-winded name, but it pretty well tells you
what the theorem says. It says that the tangent
conics of a cubic polynomial are all distinct,
and in more detail, that means there's no point
(x, y) which lies on more than one tangent conic,
so tangent conics never meet. We have a tangent
conic at every point on the curve, so for every
point on the curve, there's a parabola, or
perhaps sometimes a line in a degenerate case,
but typically a parabola opening either
downwards or opening upwards. So, if we
plot a lot of those quadratic polynomials, the
tangents at a whole number of different points,
we're going to find that there's no overlap
whatsoever between any of those quadratics
that we've drawn. No matter if we draw
a billion of them, none of them overlap.
Okay, here's a proof. The proof
is short and sweet. Suppose P is,
as before, our usual polynomial a + b alpha +
c alpha^2 + d alpha^3 with d not equal to zero,
and suppose that we have some point (x, y)
lying on some tangent conic associated with
the point r. Well, here is the equation for
the tangent conic, and if (x, y) lies on it,
it means that y = this quantity plus this
quantity times x plus this quantity times x^2.
This is, after all, the equation of that
tangent conic that we wrote down before,
so it's all contained in this equation
here. Let's have a good look at it.
So, what we're going to do is we're going to put
all the terms involving r on that side and all
the other terms on this side. So, there's
a y, the a comes to the other side as -a,
the bx comes over here, the cx^2 comes over
here, and this term—I'll explain in a minute—on
the other side, we have dr^3. In fact, all these
three terms on our left will have a factor of d,
so we'll pull that out, then we'll have an r^3,
a -3r^2x, a +3rx^2, because we pulled the d out
front. And at this point, we recognize, or should
recognize, this is almost a binomial expansion of
(r - x)^3, and to make it such an expansion,
we add -(r - x)^3 inside this bracket. So,
we've added -d(x^3) to this side, and
to compensate to keep things equal,
we're going to add -d(x^3) inside here. Well,
then this is just d(r - x)^3. And what's that
telling us? It's telling us that the value of r
for which the tangent conic passes through (x,
y) is given by this equation. This is some
number, d is some number which is nonzero,
so something equals (r - x)^3. But we just saw
that the polynomial alpha^3 was one-to-one, so
there's at most one r that can possibly have this
property. There's at most one value of r such that
this thing cubed equals this number divided by d.
That means there's at most one tangent conic that
goes through the point (x, y)—you can't find two
tangent conics going through (x, y), only one. The
r is given by this equation, and that determines r
completely. And that's the proof of the theorem—it
means that through every point, there's at most
one tangent conic going through that point.
The surprising nature of this result
becomes clearer when we look at an example,
especially when we try to draw some of these
tangent conics. So, here is that cubic that
we were looking at before—the one with the
equation 5 - 3 alpha - 4 alpha^2 + alpha^3.
And here is a formula for the tangent conic
of this thing at r. So, I'm replacing the a,
b, c, and d with 5, -3, -4, and 1, and
that's the formula that we get. Now,
for various values of r, you can sub in here, and
you're going to get different conics appearing,
and I've graphed some of them at least roughly
here for you. Probably the most interesting and
most important one is actually the one that
occurs right here at the point 4/3. 4/3 is an
important point for this cubic—in fact, it's
the most important point on the cubic—it's
the inflection point. That's exactly the point at
which this second derivative is zero, so at which
point the tangent conic becomes a degree one
curve instead of being a degree two curve. So,
it means that for that particular value of r, this
gives a line, and it's in fact that line there
in green. So, that's the tangent conic at 4/3, or
the second tangent at 4/3—it's not really a conic,
it's a sort of degenerate conic. This is
sort of a line of inflection of the curve.
Now, here are some other tangent conics: at
the point 2, the tangent conic looks like this,
roughly. At 3, the tangent conic is this one,
roughly. At 4, it's like this. At 5, it should
be something like that. As we go on further, we
get more and more parabolas in that region there.
On the other side of the line of inflection,
say at 1, which is just a little bit to the
left of the inflection point, the tangent conic
there is pretty close to being a line—locally,
it looks like that. Of course, it's part of a
big parabola. Then at zero, the tangent conic
looks like this—parabola opening downwards.
At -1, it's like this. At -2, it's like this.
And as we keep on going down, there are more and
more parabolas inside here. So pretty well every
point in the plane is approximately on one of
these tangent conics—the tangent conics fill up
the visible plane, at least approximately. And
if you actually draw a more accurate diagram,
it's a bit of a marvel to me that all of
these curves can fit together in such a
beautiful way—they're all tangent to the original
cubic, all exactly tangent at different points,
but they all miss each other just dramatically,
and they all sort of snuggle together to form
kind of a foliation, like a bunch of leaves or
lines that fill up the plane but are curved.
Alright, so as far as I know, this is a new
theorem. It's a little bit surprising to me
that it's new—it's surprising that it's not
well-known, and I very well doubt that it's
really new. It's impossible for me to imagine
that 19th-century mathematicians would not have
discovered this at some point. But there are
so many works that have been lost in libraries
and in dusty tomes that maybe someday we'll
have access to electronically, but currently,
they're still essentially buried to us. So, it's
a little bit hard to say for sure that something
is new, but I think this theorem really
catches one's eye and deserves attention.
This is just a start to cubic curves, and
I think it's a good place to introduce an
important new family of objects. We're going to
talk now a little bit about algebraic curves,
with the idea of extending our
idea of conics and cubics from
this polynomial point of view to
a two-variable point of view. So,
this is going to allow us to deal with much
more general curves, and the question of how
does one do calculus with more general curves
is a very interesting one, especially how
do we do elementary calculus like we've been
doing here? Do the techniques extend? If so,
how? We're going to make a start on that next time
when we have an introduction to algebraic curves.
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]